doc/book/error-handlers.md, before:

# Error Handlers

In your application, you may need to handle error conditions:

- Errors raised by PHP itself (e.g., inability to open a file or database
  connection).
- Exceptions/throwables raised by PHP and/or code you write or consume.
- Inability of any middleware to handle a request.

You can typically handle these conditions via middleware itself.

## Handling 404 conditions

If no middleware is able to handle the incoming request, this is typically
representative of an HTTP 404 status. Stratigility provides a barebones
middleware that you may register in an innermost layer that will return a 404
condition, `Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\NotFoundHandler`. The class requires a
response prototype instance that it will use to provide the 404 status and a
message indicating the request method and URI used:

```php
// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(new NotFoundHandler(new Response());

// execute application
```

Note that it is the last middleware piped into the application! Since it returns
a response, no deeper neseted layers will execute once it has been invoked.

If you would like a templated response, you will need to write your own
middleware; such middleware might look like the following:

```php
class NotFoundMiddleware
{
    private $renderer;

    public function __construct(
        TemplateRendererInterface $renderer,
        ResponseInterface $response
    ) {
        $this->renderer = $renderer;
        $this->response = $response;
    }

    public function __invoke($request)
    {
        $response = $this->response->withStatus(404);
        $response->getBody()->write(
            $this->renderer->render('error::404')
        );
        return $response;
    }
}
```

## Handling PHP errors and exceptions

`Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler` is a middleware implementation to
register as the *outermost layer* of your application (or one of the outermost
layers). It does the following:

- Creates a PHP error handler that catches any errors in the `error_handling()`
  mask and throws them as `ErrorException` instances.
- Wraps the call to `$next()` in a try/catch block:
  - if no exception is caught, and the result is a response, it returns it.
  - if no exception is caught, it raises an exception, which will be caught.
  - any caught exception is transformed into an error response.

To generate the error response, we provide the ability to inject a callable with
the following signature into the `ErrorHandler` during instantiation:

```php
Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;

function (
    Throwable|Exception $e,
    ServerRequestInterface $request,
    ResponseInterface $response
) : ResponseInterface
```

We provide a default implementation, `Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorResponseGenerator`,
which generates an error response with a 5XX series status code and a message
derived from the reason phrase, if any is present. You may pass a boolean flag
to its constructor indicating the application is in development mode; if so, the
response will have the stack trace included in the body.

In order to work, the `ErrorHandler` needs a prototype response instance, and,
optionally, an error response generator (if none is provided,
`ErrorResponseGenerator` is used, in production mode):

```php
// setup error handling
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(new Response(), new ErrorResponseGenerator($isDevelopmentMode));

// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
```

As a full example, you can combine the two middleware into the same application
as separate layers:

```php
// setup error handling
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(new Response(), new ErrorResponseGenerator($isDevelopmentMode));

// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);

// setup 404 handling
$app->pipe(new NotFoundHandler(new Response());

// execute application
```

The `ErrorResponseGenerator` provides no templating facilities, and only
responds as text/html. If you want to provide a templated response, or a
different serialization and/or markup format, you will need to write your own
error response generator.

As an example:

```php
use ErrorException;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
use Throwable;
use Zend\Stratigility\Exception\MissingResponseException;
use Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler;

class TemplatedErrorResponseGenerator
{
    private $isDevelopmentMode;
    private $renderer;

    public function __construct(
        TemplateRendererInterface $renderer,
        $isDevelopmentMode = false
    ) {
        $this->renderer = $renderer;
        $this->isDevelopmentMode = $isDevelopmentMode;
    }

    public function __invoke($e, ServerRequestInterface $request, ResponseInterface $response)
    {
        $response = $response->withStatus(500);
        $response->getBody()->write($this->renderer->render('error::error', [
            'exception'        => $e,
            'development_mode' => $this->isDevelopmentMode,
        ]));
        return $response;
    }
}
```

You would then pass this to the `ErrorHandler`:

```php
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(
    new Response(),
    new TemplatedErrorResponseGenerator($renderer, $isDevelopmentMode)
));
```

### ErrorHandler Listeners

`Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler` provides the ability to attach
*listeners*; these are triggered when an error or exception is caught, and
provided with the exception/throwable raised, the original request, and the
final response. These instances are considered immutable, so listeners are for
purposes of logging/monitoring only.

Listeners must implement the following signature:

```php
Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;

function (
    Throwable|Exception $e,
    ServerRequestInterface $request,
    ResponseInterface $response
) : void
```

Attach listeners using `ErrorHandler::attachListener()`:

```php
$errorHandler->attachListener(function ($throwable, $request, $response) use ($logger) {
    $message = sprintf(
        '[%s] %s %s: %s',
        date('Y-m-d H:i:s'),
        $request->getMethod(),
        (string) $request->getUri(),
        $throwable->getMessage()
    );
    $logger->error($message);
});
```

## Legacy error middleware

- Deprecated starting in 1.3.0, to be removed in 2.0.0. Please see the
  [migration guide](migration/to-v2.md#error-handling) for more details, as well
  as the preceding section.

To handle errors, you can write middleware that accepts **exactly** four arguments:

```php
function ($error, $request, $response, $next) { }
```

Alternately, you can implement `Zend\Stratigility\ErrorMiddlewareInterface`.

When using `MiddlewarePipe`, as the queue is executed, if `$next()` is called with an argument, or
if an exception is thrown, middleware will iterate through the queue until the first such error
handler is found. That error handler can either complete the request, or itself call `$next()`.
**Error handlers that call `$next()` SHOULD call it with the error it received itself, or with
another error.**

Error handlers are usually attached at the end of middleware, to prevent attempts at executing
non-error-handling middleware, and to ensure they can intercept errors from any other handlers.

Commit message:

Update documentation for 1.3.0 features
Primarily, to demonstrate http-interop middleware wherever possible.

doc/book/error-handlers.md, after:

# Error Handlers

In your application, you may need to handle error conditions:

- Errors raised by PHP itself (e.g., inability to open a file or database
  connection).
- Exceptions/throwables raised by PHP and/or code you write or consume.
- Inability of any middleware to handle a request.

You can typically handle these conditions via middleware itself.

## Handling 404 conditions

If no middleware is able to handle the incoming request, this is typically
representative of an HTTP 404 status. Stratigility provides a barebones
middleware that you may register in an innermost layer that will return a 404
condition, `Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\NotFoundHandler`. The class requires a
response prototype instance that it will use to provide the 404 status and a
message indicating the request method and URI used:

```php
// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(new NotFoundHandler(new Response());

// execute application
```

Note that it is the last middleware piped into the application! Since it returns
a response, no deeper nested layers will execute once it has been invoked.

If you would like a templated response, you will need to write your own
middleware; such middleware might look like the following:

```php
use Interop\Http\Middleware\DelegateInterface;
use Interop\Http\Middleware\ServerMiddlewareInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;

class NotFoundMiddleware implements ServerMiddlewareInterface
{
    private $renderer;

    public function __construct(
        TemplateRendererInterface $renderer,
        ResponseInterface $response
    ) {
        $this->renderer = $renderer;
        $this->response = $response;
    }

    public function process(ServerRequestInterface $request, DelegateInterface $delegate)
    {
        $response = $this->response->withStatus(404);
        $response->getBody()->write(
            $this->renderer->render('error::404')
        );
        return $response;
    }
}
```

## Handling PHP errors and exceptions

`Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler` is a middleware implementation to
register as the *outermost layer* of your application (or close to the outermost
layer). It does the following:

- Creates a PHP error handler that catches any errors in the `error_handling()`
  mask and throws them as `ErrorException` instances.
- Wraps the invocation of the delegate in a try/catch block:
  - if no exception is caught, and the result is a response, it returns it.
  - if no exception is caught, it raises an exception, which will be caught.
  - any caught exception is transformed into an error response.

To generate the error response, we provide the ability to inject a callable with
the following signature into the `ErrorHandler` during instantiation:

```php
Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;

function (
    Throwable|Exception $e,
    ServerRequestInterface $request,
    ResponseInterface $response
) : ResponseInterface
```

We provide a default implementation, `Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorResponseGenerator`,
which generates an error response with a `5XX` series status code and a message
derived from the reason phrase, if any is present. You may pass a boolean flag
to its constructor indicating the application is in development mode; if so, the
response will have the stack trace included in the body.

In order to work, the `ErrorHandler` needs a prototype response instance, and,
optionally, an error response generator (if none is provided,
`ErrorResponseGenerator` is used, in production mode):

```php
// setup error handling
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(new Response(), new ErrorResponseGenerator($isDevelopmentMode));

// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
```

As a full example, you can combine the two middleware into the same application
as separate layers:

```php
// setup error handling
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(new Response(), new ErrorResponseGenerator($isDevelopmentMode));

// setup layers
$app->pipe(/* ... */);
$app->pipe(/* ... */);

// setup 404 handling
$app->pipe(new NotFoundHandler(new Response());

// execute application
```

The `ErrorResponseGenerator` provides no templating facilities, and only
responds as `text/html`. If you want to provide a templated response, or a
different serialization and/or markup format, you will need to write your own
error response generator.

As an example:

```php
use ErrorException;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
use Throwable;
use Zend\Stratigility\Exception\MissingResponseException;
use Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler;

class TemplatedErrorResponseGenerator
{
    private $isDevelopmentMode;
    private $renderer;

    public function __construct(
        TemplateRendererInterface $renderer,
        $isDevelopmentMode = false
    ) {
        $this->renderer = $renderer;
        $this->isDevelopmentMode = $isDevelopmentMode;
    }

    public function __invoke($e, ServerRequestInterface $request, ResponseInterface $response)
    {
        $response = $response->withStatus(500);
        $response->getBody()->write($this->renderer->render('error::error', [
            'exception'        => $e,
            'development_mode' => $this->isDevelopmentMode,
        ]));
        return $response;
    }
}
```

You would then pass this to the `ErrorHandler`:

```php
$app->pipe(new ErrorHandler(
    new Response(),
    new TemplatedErrorResponseGenerator($renderer, $isDevelopmentMode)
));
```

### ErrorHandler Listeners

`Zend\Stratigility\Middleware\ErrorHandler` provides the ability to attach
*listeners*; these are triggered when an error or exception is caught, and
provided with the exception/throwable raised, the original request, and the
final response. These instances are considered immutable, so listeners are for
purposes of logging/monitoring only.

Listeners must implement the following signature:

```php
Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface;
Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface;

function (
    Throwable|Exception $e,
    ServerRequestInterface $request,
    ResponseInterface $response
) : void
```

Attach listeners using `ErrorHandler::attachListener()`:

```php
$errorHandler->attachListener(function ($throwable, $request, $response) use ($logger) {
    $message = sprintf(
        '[%s] %s %s: %s',
        date('Y-m-d H:i:s'),
        $request->getMethod(),
        (string) $request->getUri(),
        $throwable->getMessage()
    );
    $logger->error($message);
});
```

## Legacy error middleware

- Deprecated starting in 1.3.0, to be removed in 2.0.0. Please see the
  [migration guide](migration/to-v2.md#error-handling) for more details, as well
  as the preceding section.

To handle errors, you can write middleware that accepts **exactly** four arguments:

```php
function ($error, $request, $response, $next) { }
```

Alternately, you can implement `Zend\Stratigility\ErrorMiddlewareInterface`.

When using `MiddlewarePipe`, as the queue is executed, if `$next()` is called with an argument, or
if an exception is thrown, middleware will iterate through the queue until the first such error
handler is found. That error handler can either complete the request, or itself call `$next()`.
**Error handlers that call `$next()` SHOULD call it with the error it received itself, or with
another error.**

Error handlers are usually attached at the end of middleware, to prevent attempts at executing
non-error-handling middleware, and to ensure they can intercept errors from any other handlers.
